---
title: "What's this bird? Classify old natural history drawings with R"
slug: birds-ocr
authors:
  - name: Maëlle Salmon
    url: https://masalmon.eu/
date: 2018-08-28
preface: The blog post series corresponds to the material for a talk Maëlle wll give at the [Animal Movement Analysis summer school in Radolfzell, Germany on September the 12th](http://animove.org/animove-2019-evening-keynotes/), in a Max Plant Institute of Ornithology.
tags:
- magick
- tesseract
- cld2
- cld3
- taxize
- birder
output: 
  md_document:
    variant: markdown_github
    preserve_yaml: true
---

In this new post, we’re taking a break from modern birding data in [our
birder’s series](https://ropensci.org/tags/birder)… let’s explore
gorgeous drawings from a natural history collection! Armed with
rOpenSci’s packages binding powerful C++ libraries and open taxonomy
data, how much information can we automatically extract from images?
Maybe not much, but we’ll at least have explored image manipulation,
optical character recognition, language detection, taxonomic name
resolution with rOpenSci’s packages.

### Free natural history images and appropriate R tooling!

A long time ago I had bookmarked the [flickr account of the Biodiversity
Heritage Library](https://www.flickr.com/people/biodivlibrary/). So many
beautiful images of biodiversity, moreover free to use! In particular, I
[downloaded all pictures from one of the Birds of Australia
albums](https://www.flickr.com/photos/biodivlibrary/sets/72157694191194992).

I wanted to try to extract the bird names on images using packages of
Jeroen Ooms’, rOpenSci’s post-doc hacker & C(++)-bindings wizard. In
particular, I wanted to try extract names of
[`magick`](https://github.com/ropensci/magick) for image manipulation,
[`tesseract`](https://github.com/ropensci/tesseract) for optical
character recognition,
[`cld2`](https://github.com/ropensci/cld2)/[`cld3`](https://github.com/ropensci/cld3)
for language detection… Quite the armory! We’ll also sprinkle some
taxonomy magic by Scott Chamberlain, one of rOpenSci’s co-founders, to
resolve the names extracted.

### OCR-bird naming workflow, piece by piece

#### Image preparation

I saved the pictures locally in a “birds” folder. Yes, I click-buttoned
instead of using [the Flickr API](https://www.flickr.com/services/api/)
for which e.g. Jim Hester wrote a [minimal R
wrapper](https://github.com/jimhester/flickrr)… I don’t do *everything*
with R scripts (yet).

``` r
library("magrittr")
filenames <- fs::dir_ls("birds")
```

Each image shows a bird and its name. Images are either landscape- or
portrait- oriented, but for the sake of simplicity, I’ll act as if they
were all portrait- oriented. *What I’d do if I weren’t after simplicity
but still as lazy would be to duplicate images rotated
(`magick::image_rotate`) in all possible directions, applying the
workflow, hoping to get good data from one of the rotated versions.*

``` r
magick::image_read(filenames[1])
```

<img src="/img/blog-images/2018-08-28-birds-ocr/unnamed-chunk-2-1.png" width="1376" />

From that image, I wanted to extract the name indicated below the bird.
To maximize the efficiency of Optical Character Recognition, we shall
first prepare the image, since the [accuracy of OCR depends on the
quality of the input
image](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/tesseract/vignettes/intro.html#preprocessing_with_magick)
which we can influence a bit. This part could be tweaked even more, and
in real life examples it’ll be worth spending time trying different
`magick` functions and parameter values. Since I have in mind the case
of a bunch of images to be batch-processed, nothing is done by hand.

``` r
crop_bird <- function(filename){
  image <- magick::image_read(filename)
  
  height <- magick::image_info(image)$height
  
  # crop the top of the image
  image <- magick::image_crop(image, 
                     paste0("+0+",round(0.75*height))) %>%
    # convert the image to black and white
    magick::image_convert(type = "grayscale") %>%
    # increase brightness
    magick::image_modulate(brightness = 120) %>%
    magick::image_enhance() %>%
    magick::image_median() %>%
    magick::image_contrast() 
  
  # we'll need the filename later
  attr(image, "filename") <- filename
  
  return(image)
}

crop_bird(filenames[1])
```

<img src="/img/blog-images/2018-08-28-birds-ocr/unnamed-chunk-3-1.png" width="1376" />

It does look cleaner now!

#### Text extraction

Now is the actual OCR step! The `tesseract` package provides bindings to
the [Tesseract OCR
engine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tesseract_(software)), free
software currently sponsored by Google. It is a powerful engine, with a
ton of parameters. Here again, tweaking a lot is warranted. Particularly
useful reads are [`tesseract`
vignette](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/tesseract/vignettes/intro.html)
and this [Wiki page of Tesseract about improving the quality of the
output](https://github.com/tesseract-ocr/tesseract/wiki/ImproveQuality).
The [`hocr` package](https://github.com/dmi3kno/hocr) might be of
interest for post-processing of OCR results.

Below, we only changed the [page segmentation
mode](https://github.com/tesseract-ocr/tesseract/wiki/ImproveQuality#page-segmentation-method)
choosing 1 for “Automatic page segmentation with Orientation and script
detection (OSD)”. We tried using Latin instead of English training data,
but the results were less good.

One can use either `tesseract::ocr` for a file path, url, or raw vector
to image, or `magick::image_ocr` for a `magick` object which is quite
handy in our pipeline.

The function below also filter results of the OCR using language
detection. By only keeping text recognized as either Latin or English by
one of the two languages detection packages `cld2` and `cld3` that are
interfaces to Google compact language detectors 2 and 3, we have a first
quality filter. If we didn’t do that, we’d end up with more unusable
text.

``` r
get_names <- function(image){
  filename <- attr(image, "filename")
  ocr_options <- list(tessedit_pageseg_mode = 1)
   
  text <- magick::image_ocr(image, options = ocr_options)
  text <- stringr::str_split(text, "\n", simplify = TRUE)
  text <- stringr::str_remove_all(text, "[0-9]")
  text <- stringr::str_remove_all(text, "[:punct:]")
  text <- trimws(text)
  text <- stringr::str_remove_all(text, "~")
  text <- text[text != ""]
  text <- tolower(text)
  
  # remove one letter words
  # https://stackoverflow.com/questions/31203843/r-find-and-remove-all-one-to-two-letter-words
  text <- stringr::str_remove_all(text, " *\\b[[:alpha:]]{1,2}\\b *")
  text <- text[text != ""]
  
  # keep only the words that are recognized as either Latin
  # or English by cld2 or cld3
  if(length(text) > 0){
    results <- tibble::tibble(text = text,
                 cld2 = cld2::detect_language(text),
                 cld3 = cld3::detect_language(text),
                 filename = filename)
  
  results[results $cld2 %in% c("la", "en") |
          results$cld3 %in% c("la", "en"),]
  }else{
    return(NULL)
  }
  
  
}

(results1 <- filenames[1] %>%
  magick::image_read() %>%
  get_names())
```

    ## NULL

``` r
(results2 <- filenames[1] %>%
  crop_bird() %>%
  get_names())
```

    ## # A tibble: 2 x 4
    ##   text                 cld2  cld3  filename                          
    ##   <chr>                <chr> <chr> <fs::path>                        
    ## 1 climacteris picumnus <NA>  la    birds/n115_w1150_42399797481_o.jpg
    ## 2 brown tree creeper   en    <NA>  birds/n115_w1150_42399797481_o.jpg

So we see that the image transformation was quite useful.

Now, these names look fine, but how to be sure they’re actually
taxonomic names?

#### Taxonomic name resolution

The [`taxize` package](https://github.com/ropensci/taxize/) by Scott
Chamberlain, taxonomic toolbelt for R, provides access to many fantastic
data sources and tools for taxonomy. One of them, the Global Name
Resolver, provides, well, resolution of taxonomic names, sadly not
common names. `taxize::gnr_resolve` has many options, we only make use
of the one returning only the best match from the different data
sources.

``` r
latin <- results2$text[results2$cld2 == "la"|
                         results2$cld3 == "la"]
taxize::gnr_resolve(latin,
  best_match_only = TRUE)
```

    ## # A tibble: 1 x 5
    ##   user_supplied_name submitted_name  matched_name   data_source_tit~ score
    ## * <chr>              <chr>           <chr>          <chr>            <dbl>
    ## 1 climacteris picum~ Climacteris pi~ Climacteris p~ NCBI             0.988

English names could be cleaned up a bit using the [`spelling`
package](https://github.com/ropensci/spelling), also an rOpenSci’s
package, since `spelling::spell_check_text` would output possible typos.

### OCR-bird naming workflow in action!

We apply the first two steps, image processing and OCR, to all images.

``` r
bird_names <- purrr::map(filenames, crop_bird) %>%
  purrr::map_df(get_names)
```

Out of 51 images only 17 are present in the final table with possible
names which is a bit disheartening, but we could surely do better in the
image processing and OCR tweaking steps! Maybe one could frame the
parameter search [as a machine learning
problem](https://twitter.com/dmi3k/status/1024919690768990209). We
should also keep in mind that such Natural History images are quite hard
to parse.

The name resolution information can be added to this table.

``` r
safe_resolve <- function(text){
  
  results <- taxize::gnr_resolve(text,
                                 best_match_only = TRUE)
  
  if(nrow(results) == 0){
    list(NULL)
  }else{
    list(results)
  }
}

bird_names <- dplyr::group_by(bird_names, text) %>%
  dplyr::mutate(gnr = ifelse(cld2 == "la" | cld3 == "la",
                             safe_resolve(text),
                             list(NULL)))
```

We do not get much resolution, but we knew the names weren’t very good
to start with. A better idea here might be to get a full list of names
of Australian birds, potentially leveraging [the `taxizedb` package by
Scott Chamberlain](https://github.com/ropensci/taxizedb), and to then
fuzzy-match them with the names we have.

``` r
unique(bird_names$gnr)
```

    ## [[1]]
    ## # A tibble: 1 x 5
    ##   user_supplied_name submitted_name  matched_name   data_source_tit~ score
    ## * <chr>              <chr>           <chr>          <chr>            <dbl>
    ## 1 climacteris picum~ Climacteris pi~ Climacteris p~ NCBI             0.988
    ## 
    ## [[2]]
    ## [1] NA
    ## 
    ## [[3]]
    ## NULL
    ## 
    ## [[4]]
    ## # A tibble: 1 x 5
    ##   user_supplied_na~ submitted_name  matched_name  data_source_title  score
    ## * <chr>             <chr>           <chr>         <chr>              <dbl>
    ## 1 austrodicaeum ii~ Austrodicaeum ~ Austrodicaeu~ The Interim Regis~  0.75
    ## 
    ## [[5]]
    ## # A tibble: 1 x 5
    ##   user_supplied_name submitted_name  matched_name   data_source_tit~ score
    ## * <chr>              <chr>           <chr>          <chr>            <dbl>
    ## 1 melithreptus laet~ Melithreptus l~ Melithreptus ~ CU*STAR          0.988
    ## 
    ## [[6]]
    ## # A tibble: 1 x 5
    ##   user_supplied_na~ submitted_name matched_name  data_source_title   score
    ## * <chr>             <chr>          <chr>         <chr>               <dbl>
    ## 1 rad isdlvorniode  Rad isdlvorni~ Rad Baker & ~ The Interim Regist~  0.75

### Conclusion

#### rOpenSci packages supporting this (and your) workflow

In this post, we made use of R packages quite useful to wrangle
information from diverse formats:

-   [`magick`](https://github.com/ropensci/magick) for image
    manipulation,

-   [`tesseract`](https://github.com/ropensci/tesseract) for optical
    character recognition,

-   [`cld2`](https://github.com/ropensci/cld2)/[`cld3`](https://github.com/ropensci/cld3)
    for language detection.

We also used [a function from
`taxize`](https://github.com/ropensci/taxize) allowing to use [the
Global Name Resolver](https://resolver.globalnames.org/about). Discover
more packages from our suite [here](https://ropensci.org/packages/).

#### Applicability of this OCR bird-naming workflow

Actually, the Biodiversity Heritage Library itself provides OCR output
for its collection, see [this
example](https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/250938#page/37/mode/1up).
I wasn’t able to find information about the software powering this OCR.
What I *was* able to find out is that the BHL uses [purposeful
gaming](https://biodivlib.wikispaces.com/Purposeful+Gaming) in [its OCR
worfklow](https://biodivlib.wikispaces.com/file/view/Workflowdiagram.pdf).
The raw OCR results aren’t much better than what we got in this post
which is comforting.

#### More data from the Biodiversity Heritage Library

If you’re interested in the data, images but not only, of the
Biodiversity Heritage Library, have a look at the [`rbhl`
paclage](https://github.com/ropensci/rbhl), part of rOpenSci’s suite,
that interacts with the BHL API. One can e.g. search all books by the
same author as the one we used images from.

``` r
author <- rbhl::bhl_authorsearch("Gregory M Mathews")
books <- rbhl::bhl_getauthortitles(creatorid = author$CreatorID)
head(books$FullTitle)
```

    ## [1] "A manual of the birds of Australia,"                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
    ## [2] "A list of the birds of the Phillipian sub-region : which do not occur in Australia. "                                                                                                                                                                                         
    ## [3] "A manual of the birds of Australia /"                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
    ## [4] "A list of the birds of Australia : containing the names and synonyms connected with each genus, species, and subspecies of birds found in Australia, at present known to the author /"                                                                                        
    ## [5] "Austral avian record; a scientific journal devoted primarily to the study of the Australian avifauna."                                                                                                                                                                        
    ## [6] "Arcana, or, The museum of natural history : containing the most recent discovered objects : embellished with coloured plates, and corresponding descriptions : with extracts relating to animals, and remarks of celebrated travellers; combining a general survey of nature."

Or we could get all books whose title contains the words “birds” and
“australia”.

``` r
australia_birds <- rbhl::bhl_booksearch(title = "birds Australia")
head(australia_birds$FullTitle)
```

    ## [1] "Handbook to the birds of Australia. : [Supplementary material in Charles Darwin's copy]."
    ## [2] "An introduction to The birds of Australia /"                                             
    ## [3] "The useful birds of southern Australia : with notes on other birds /"                    
    ## [4] "The Birds of Australia"                                                                  
    ## [5] "The birds of Australia,"                                                                 
    ## [6] "The birds of Australia,"

And to get the OCR of the pages of the book we used, we could write:

``` r
book <- rbhl::bhl_getitempages("250938", ocr = TRUE)

library("magrittr")

book <- dplyr::group_by(book, PageUrl) %>%
  dplyr::mutate(page_type = toString(PageTypes[[1]]))

pics <- dplyr::filter(book, page_type == "Illustration")

pics$OcrText
```

So there’s quite a lot to explore!

#### More birding soon!

Stay tuned for the next post in this series, about getting and using
bird taxonomic and trait data in R! In the meantime, happy birding!
